greetings and welcome back again ladies
and gentlemens la salut Montgomery hair
as usual welcoming you to the exciting
conclusion of our little dime-store
overview of poetry in the tang dynasty
CHP Episode Deuce and a quarter part 8
for everyone who might have been pining
for a nice deep dive into all the fine
points and critical analysis of the
subject matter I hope you weren't too
terribly disappointed but I did provide
you with some great links to enough Tong
dynasty poetry to last you almost but
not quite a lifetime last episode in
part 7 we looked at the middle tongue
period and focused on three of the
biggies who were all friends by jooyi
you and John and Sri Tom they all got to
bask in the afterglow of the destruction
caused during the years of the unloosen
rebellion now before we dive right into
the late Tong period and the poet
superstars of that sad time and all
their melancholy poetry let's squeeze in
one more middle tongue poet FMO so this
one intrigued me quite a bit maybe
because he was considered to be so
strange
I'm talking about leha he didn't have
what they called Ren's high or human
Talent people said leha that he had
greats high demons talent the talent of
an evil spirit her ghost his poetry was
so unconventional and downright
disturbing to the traditionalists who
liked their loser and Jeju Penta and
hepta syllabic quatrains and easy to
follow rules and then Along Came this
guy those in the early 9th century
didn't know what to make of Lee huh you
know they called me by the Shushan the
poet immortal do fool was the sure Shung
the poet sage and leha he was the shirk
way the poet demon or devil he was born
in Yi yang County just to the west of
Luang like several of the poets I've
mentioned in this series his birth year
is in dispute
it was somewhere around the Year 790
during the time of tong emperor dezong
and that long and unstable reign his
father claimed some distant relation to
the Leeroy family
remember the Janna Lee Sherman the two
co-founders of the Tong dynasty all
subsequent emperors of the Tong dynasty
were surnamed Lee after dead song eunuch
sorta took control of the levers of
power and throughout all the millennia
of Chinese history when eunuchs ran
things on behalf of the Emperor when do
you ever hear of a dynasty that lived
happily ever after
whatever we know of leha comes from the
old and new books of tong a couple of
the official histories of that dynasty
when at seven years of age he had the
opportunity to meet the great Han Yu the
scholar official extraordinaire he
composed a poem like Wang Wei he was
another wunderkind who exhibited
extraordinary promise Han Yeo even
became a patron and leha's biggest
supporter he was a little too eccentric
for words Jon diffraction professor
emeritus at Murdoch University who
passed in 2016 translated many poems by
leha and published them in a book called
The Collected Poems of leha I'll have a
link to it in the episode notes
Professor fraud sham noted that the
morning routine for this poet was to
rise early set out on horseback until he
received that jolt of inspiration he'd
stopped his horse write a poem and then
throw it away and then one of his
servants or someone who followed him
would retrieve the discarded poem and
save them in a tapestry bag and leha
himself kept all his poems safe in a bag
of his own only 240 of his poems
survived into our day but in his own
time he was quite prolific it's just
that most of his work never made it and
he had a lot of detractors and don't go
looking for any Lee her poems and the
tongue her son by show he got left out
on purpose
and not just the 300 tongue poems plenty
of other Tong dynasty anthologies
omitted him as well let's just say many
influencers throughout the centuries had
pretty strong feelings about him and it
wasn't until late in the Ching that Lee
hood received the recognition he enjoys
today which means perhaps he was more
than a thousand years ahead of his time
in his short life he acted as the
outsider bucking the Confucian tradition
and all the sensibilities that went with
those established ways of writing poetry
all kinds of words have been used to
describe Lee huh and they all rhyme with
non conforming the dates of leha's birth
death are not even agreed on unlike a
lot of figures from this ancient period
whatever we know from the texts that
survived through the ages is a case of
who knows he's been described as thin
and sickly and his appearance tall and
cadaverous a heck of a unibrow and
overly long fingernails white here he
frequented brothels and it's been
suggested that the diseases most
associated with this brothel lifestyle
was what killed him sometime around the
Year 816 he only lived to 26 or 27
despite the promise he had shown as a
youngin and having someone as eminent as
Hanyu standing in his corner his career
in the Tong civil service was marked
with a dramatic controversy and ended up
being miserable leha
only served in a few unpalatable
postings whether this hastened his
decline and early demise as a matter of
speculation they could have been the
accumulated disappointments or perhaps
his addiction to wine and women whose to
know for sure but his dark sensual Airy
and bizarre poems and the provocative
images he vocht well it wasn't for
everyone but I'll tell you one person
who dug leha's poems Chairman Mao he was
a big fan of the San Lee the three Lee's
Lee PI Lee who
and the poet were going to get to in a
moment li Shang in these three Tong
poets surnamed Lee were all admired by
the great helmsman and say what you want
about Mao he knew his poetry and could
argue the merits and deficiencies of any
poem with any scholar so Lee huh got
swept under the rug for a very long time
but he got to enjoy his comeback and the
weird obscure and otherworldly language
he used to express himself really hit
the mark if not for the two poets we're
gonna discuss next
who wrote of Li hub and it's very likely
he never would have been appreciated and
his scant catalog of poems wouldn't have
survived leha's close friend named shun
sue Ming was entrusted with Lee's work
on his deathbed and he dutifully took
all these 233 poems and placed them in a
safe place
were they languished for fifteen years
after this decade and a half
Shunta Ming one day opened the trunk and
reacquainted himself with these poems
and was so moved that he approached the
two late tong poets we're gonna look at
next dou mu and li Shang in and ask them
to write a few nice words for the
collection of poems of Li hood he was
compiling everything written about li
huh well we can't take it at face value
like Strawberry Fields
we're leha's concerned nothing is real
but it's like that for a lot of Chinese
history from these centuries from so
long ago these stories and BIOS were
inscribed into these histories like the
Xin Tang Xu the new book of tongue and
in BIOS taken from so many other
anthologies and compilations these
stories became the legend JD fraud sham
who understood Lee hood as well as any
Western translator could said of him
quote although famous in the ninth
century and never quite forgotten he
offended conventionality by his
individuality and its health and balance
by his morbidity and violence to see his
peculiar
qualities as virtues required the
breakdown of traditional literacy
standards in the 19th and 20th centuries
end quote
let me read one of leha's more famous
poems I lifted this one from David
Hinton's translation from his anthology
of classical Chinese poetry you could
find it amongst the links and resources
I included in the episode notes
it's called mung TM dreaming of heaven
law 2 hon Chan chi-chuen Suk chul Oh
Bank I be sure by Yulin Yalu shirt Wan
WAN Wan Pei Xian Fung Kwai Chang more
huangshan Ching shui San Changsha
Gandhian Chen Yin root soma yaw Wong she
choked chilled Yin Yin yi Hong hi Shay
they Joan a moons old rabbit and
cold toad weeping colours of sky Lucent
wall slant across through half open
cloud towers a jade pure wheel squeezes
do into bulbs of wet light Phoenix
wastes jewels meat on cinnamon scented
pass transformations of a thousand years
gallop by like horses yellow dust soon
see water below changeless island peaks
and all China seen so far off its just
nine wisps of mist and the oceans vast
clarity a mare cup of spilled water well
let's move on to do Moo and li Shang yin
and the late Tong period do moo lived
from 803 to 852 and li Shang yen 813 858
so they were contemporary with each
other in Chinese y'all hear Li Bai and
tofu referred to as dolly do big or
greatly and do to differentiate from
these two titans of tong poetry do mu
and li Shang yang were called Xiao Li do
or little or lesser li and du du mu was
born in the capital chun on and grew up
in the household of his grandfather the
grand councillor for emperor deadzone
and aside from this high paying job
working for the emperor himself do Yas
other claim to fame was the compilation
of the Tong Jian this 200 chapter work
that survived to our day gives a very
detailed picture of Tong dynasty
institutions laws rights and military
affairs it's one of those ancient works
that isn't that well known but did
wonders to offer up a treasure trove of
details about those times in seventh and
eighth century China having a
grandfather such as this allowed young
du mu to enjoy a nice comfortable
existence at the family compound in Fant
Wan this is around present-day Xian and
the Chung on district just south of the
city except do y ou died in May 12 and 9
year old dou mu and the rest of the dew
family fortunes fell off the end of the
table but dou mu got by okay and by the
age of 25 he had passed the gene share
exam fifth highest score and began what
was to be another utterly unspectacular
and mundane career and government
service he had a number of unimpressive
postings and judge jung sangsoo on wei
zhongxian hebei the city he's most
associated with was probably young cho
where he spent about ten years his
family was always broken just kept their
head above water thanks to dual Moo's
position in the civil service in the
final years of his career he served in
the capital that he died in 852 at the
age of 49 do moos age of poetry was
called the late tong Wan Tong when he
was born leap I had already been gone
for 40 years history was not kind to the
late Tong the royal family's fortunes
after a brief but lukewarm rally were
decidedly in a drastic decline and the
familiar signs that spelled troubles for
rulers
all the way into the Republican era
we're present in the late Tung
warlordism eunuchs running Affairs
invasion from without peasant unrest and
natural disasters when it all came
crashing down in 907 the greatest empire
to date in Chinese history dissolved and
was followed by the seven gloomy decades
of the Five Dynasties and ten kingdoms
period in 979 China will be rescued by
Chuang Qian and reach even greater
heights under the Song Dynasty that he
found it and these northern song rulers
officials and scholars all looked back
to the tongue for inspiration about
everything that was great about China
but during the time of dou mu and all
these late tong poets - times were
pretty dismal the Chi urine era of 7:13
is 741 was already a distant age and do
lose time but still fresh enough where
everyone who lived under the final ten
emperors knew how good it used to be
compared to now du mu isn't just known
for his poetry he was also one of the
more renowned writers of prose as well
he wrote poems of love and composed in
all the styles both old and modern he
loved women in wine and wrote many poems
to celebrate both though he also wrote
long Fuu Rhapsody's do moos short
quatrains were perhapses best love
material let me read a couple for you
the first is one of do moves more famous
once
it's called dispelling sorrows chin why
more poor Jang Hui Jo Shang Shu yao-shan
Shi Zhang Chongqing sure nian EJ Jung
Cho Hmong in de ching low bow aiming
down on my luck wandering and drunk
oh those slim waisted girls have Chu in
the palm of my hand
ten years gone by and I still dream of
young Jo why even in the blue houses you
said I was thick
and here's another of do moves Greatest
Hits
it's called King Li Ching main festival
Ching Ming sure Jia Yu fun fun liu xiang
xin ren you Tuan horn Jia when Jo
chia-chu yo mu Tong
yo jure Shing Watson one day of Ching
Ming festival a drizzle rain falls on
the road the traveller disconsolate
inquiring where can an inn be found a
cowherd boy points far away to apricot
blossom village du mu was very close
friends with Li Xiang in these two dou
mu and li Shang in they were the most
celebrated poets of the late tongue and
most-represented of that period li Shang
yin he was the last of the Sun Li the
three Lee's who counted mouths of dong
amongst their fan club he's also called
the last of the great tong poets when he
died in Chong Joe and 8:58 or 859 the
dynasty at a mayor half-century of sans
left in their imperial hourglass Neetu
was known for more than just his poetry
the cult of du feu if you will some say
was launched by Li Xiang yen he made a
lot of hay about du feu and pointed to
his specialness and importance
so when later song scholars said du feu
was the greatest thing since Jian Bing
it was Li Xiang yang who perhaps forced
them to take notice like du feu whose
poetry helped reflect the high Tong
times he lived in li Shang yen to
through his poetry provided a window
into the fading fortunes of the late
Tung in the 300 tong poems Li Xiang Yun
had 24 included only leap by du feu and
Wang Wei had more he was famous among
many things for his love poems
they weren't the happy cheerful or
hopeful kind they were more often than
not
and melancholy by now you're no doubt
familiar with these early lives of the
poets I've mentioned some had it easy
and some had it rough some had okay
careers most did not leash on Yin had to
do everything the hard way his father
had been a low ranking official and
hadn't been able to turn a career in
government into a path to riches upon
his father's death Li Xiang yen and
family moved to lawyer like others he
too was one of those child prodigy types
who showed so much promise and seemed
destined for great things
after a few failures at the age of 24
and 8 37 he passed the gene share exam
he ended up working in the Imperial
library which suited him well but by the
time li Shang Yin started his career in
the civil service the government was
fractured and a nest of vipers dominated
by eunuchs for most of his career who
was a series of positions that dealt
with matters of Taxation crime and
paper-pushing
he had the misfortune of living through
six not so good Emperor's and worked for
a couple of them in 842 we got another
chance to return to a position at the
Imperial library but just as that
dropped in his lap his mother passed
away and he had to do what everyone else
did according to Confucian tradition
take three years off to mourn but he did
later return to the Imperial library and
was also a member of the Han Lee and
Academy his career peaked with a
position at the Ministry of Labour and
it wasn't as the Minister all in all it
was a wholly unacquainted given up on
his government career and found solace
and Buddhism his poetry didn't make him
a star in his own lifetime and Li Xiang
yin it wasn't for everyone it seemed as
if he often composed in a kind of secret
code his poetry is filled with all kinds
of illusion
that could mean any number of things
like so many poets of this middle and
late tonk period he derived no small
amount of inspiration from China's
ancient literary past in the trying
times he lived in it was only natural to
hearken back to the good old days for
China the history the myths the ancient
heroes and symbols and like doufu and
certainly Lee huh who I mentioned in
this episode li Shang Yin gets filed
under hard to translate unlike bai juyi
who we featured last episode li Shang
Yin in particular used the vaguest of
language to express himself and with
classical Chinese and all the tricks of
the trade which maximized the breadth of
meanings any single one character could
have his translated poems are sometimes
- all over the place and more than a few
sources he was called a kind of master
of ambiguity and his somber and gloomy
love poetry about secrets are forbidden
love that's one thing about li Shang Yin
that intrigued so many lovers of Chinese
classical poetry li Shang yin also did
one thing that stood out from the crowd
he wrote many of these Wu tea poems fool
tea means no title he wasn't the only
one to do this but anyone familiar with
Li Zhong Yi knows many of his best poems
were wu tea untitled likely huh li Shang
yin also got to enjoy a bit of shine in
the Ching dynasty and better late than
never
all kinds of new commentaries were
written about his work and he was really
given the once-over by the academic
community in the 18th century
well li Shang yen we can all agree
wasn't the first and he wasn't the last
artist or literary figure to have died
unappreciated in his own lifetime only
to be hailed as a master long afterwards
here's a poem by Li Xiang in the Moors
featured this one in a Chinese
literature podcast episode they did on
him it's called the plains of Lu yo
litleo urine jung-hwan ye boo shirt
Chucho donggeul urine see young wushan
ha sure sure
gene wong hood approaching evening an
uncomfortable feeling i drive the
carriage mounting the old plains the
Setting Sun limitlessly good it's only
that dusk is approaching leo urine leo
plane that's an area to the south of
Chang An in this simple four line
warrior ng @ u5 character regulated
verse poem one of the calling cards for
Tong dynasty poetry Li Xiang yang
reflects on the fading fortunes of the
dynasty there are a couple recent
translations of Li Xiang means poems
that I listed in the links and resources
at the web page at teacup tout media
there's Li Xiang yang edited and
translated by Chloe Garcia Roberts I was
published by the venerable New York
Review of Books part of the NY RB poet
series that just came out last year in
2018 and was most highly regarded you
might want to consider starting there
also highly recommended is poems of the
late Tong translated by AC Graham also
listed in the episode notes and also
published by the very same outfit as
Chloe Garcia Roberts now this one is
terribly interesting especially to
anyone who digs Pink Floyd man poems of
the late tongue was first published in
1965 and it was this edition that Roger
Waters picked up somewhere and he ended
up lifting lines from poems by Li Xiang
yang leha and du mu the three poets
featured in this episode and if you go
check out the Saucerful of Secrets album
last one I think that Syd Barrett played
on and check out the third song on the
album called set the controls for the
heart of the Sun listen carefully
because these lyrics are mumbled and not
easy to hear but you can hear Roger
Waters speaking lines from these lay
its tongue poets I wonder if their
estates received any other royalties so
how many other Chinese poets from the
book of ODEs to modern times can say
their poems were used by a rock and roll
band who sold a quarter billion records
worldwide I bet some of these quatrains
make great tattoos also if you get the
characters facing the right way you know
when I had this brainy idea a few months
ago to try and cobble together a little
overview of tong poetry that wouldn't
put you my beloved listeners to sleep I
envisioned this being a quick two-part
series three tops but by part three I
sort of knew that once again my eyes
were bigger than my stomach but in this
final part eighth episode we're going to
let the curtain fall right here so if
you think this was a lot of poetry
there's still the five dynasties ten
kingdoms period the song you're in Ming
Ching and modern times to go yet and
lovers of Chinese poetry all have their
favorite poets from all these different
eras and I know it's not the biggest
market in the world outside Greater
China but for everyone who wants to give
Chinese poetry a shot there are so many
great and talented translators in every
major world language lovingly
translating all this Chinese poetry if
you can't read Chinese read in
translation you'll still be able to
appreciate it if your interest has been
piqued at all let me assure you the
resources available to you on the web
are incredibly vast and if you like to
read your poetry the old-fashioned way
from a printed book there are more
publishers of books on poetry out there
than grains of sand you could start with
all the resources I recommended in the
episode notes and again go check out Lee
and Rob Moore's Chinese literature
podcast ok that is going to be the end
of that onwards to the next great thing
I've got something special lined up next
time for all y'alls
lszl Montgomery here signing off from
beautiful and fantastic LA imploring you
to consider coming back one more time
for another exciting episode of the
China history podcast